This right here is a tesseract, which is
a four-dimensional cube. Except this is
actually not a tesseract, but instead a
representation of a tesseract in
threedimensional space. And it looks a
little bit confusing, but by the end of
this video, I promise you'll understand
what this shape is, how 40 space and 40
objects work, how 40 space impacts you
all of the time, and why you should
care. We often think topics like this
aren't really relevant to our day-to-day
life. But learning about this subject
specifically can change your opinion on
your life, the universe, and maybe even
your spirituality. So, even if you
aren't a mathematically minded person,
you should still definitely be able to
get something out of this. And there
won't be any math in this video, just
explanations. So, because I'm trying to
explain a subject that's really
complicated in a way that the average
person would understand, I'm going to be
making a lot of simplifications and
making some compromises in this video.
So, if this topic interests you, then
you should definitely do some research
on it because it's super interesting.
And in this video, I'm really only going
to be giving you a baseline of how 4D
space works. And this is one of those
topics that you kind of have to keep
coming back to over time. So, it's okay
if things don't make sense on the first
watch. You should still be able to get
something out of this video by the end
of it.
So first of all, what actually is 4D
space? So the first thing to understand
about 4D space and 4D objects is that it
is literally impossible to comprehend
with the human brain. And the reason for
this is because we live in a
three-dimensional universe. So we're
bound to these three dimensions. And
I'll talk a little bit more later about
specifically why that is. But for now,
all you need to know is you can't
actually truly see a 4D object. However,
you can understand how 4D objects in 4D
space behave and the best way to do that
is by looking at lower dimensions. So,
first of all, what exactly is the
definition of a dimension? So, a
dimension is just a measurable extent of
some kind. So, like width, length, and
depth are the three that we use to
describe a three-dimensional universe.
But for our purposes, you can just think
about a dimension as an infinite line
that a point or a particle can travel
across. Because this particle can travel
in two directions, each dimension will
have two directions associated with it.
And we use numbers to measure that
particle's movement. So a positive
number would mean that particle is
moving forward and a negative number
means it's moving backwards. So
personally, I think the best way to
really like internalize this
understanding is to look at graphs. And
you've likely used graphs before to
obviously graph things or to solve
problems in school. And graphs are an
example of a two-dimensional space,
meaning that we only need two numbers to
measure where any particle or point is
in that space. We have the y dimension,
which is up and down, and we have the x
dimension, which is side to side. So for
the y, a positive number is up, a
negative number is down. And for the x,
a positive number is forward, and a
negative number is backwards. So like I
said, you only need two numbers to fully
describe any particle's movement in a
two-dimensional universe. And of course,
if you removed one of those dimensions,
you would only need one number. So, what
happens if you add a dimension? Well,
you could probably guess that you would
make a three-dimensional graph. So, now
you need three numbers to fully describe
a particle's movement in that space. So,
one thing that's really important to
note here that can kind of get lost a
little bit is that when we're adding a
dimension, we're literally adding a
direction to the space. Now, of course,
because we're 3D beings, when we think
about like a 2D graph, we think about a
2D graph in a 3D space. But if you lived
on that 2D graph, then you would only
have those two dimensions and one of
those sides would be infinitely thin.
But as a two-dimensional being, you
would not know that. You wouldn't be
able to recognize that. So when we add
dimensions, it's almost like we're
adding another side to reality, which
isn't like technically a mathematically
true statement, but it gets the point
across. So logically, in order to make a
four-dimensional space, you would just
have to add another dimension to a
three-dimensional space. So now you need
four numbers to describe a particle's
point in that universe. So now we have
width, length, depth, and breadth, which
is the fourth term that we need to
describe that new fourth dimension that
we just added. So that's how you
construct a 4D space. But 4D shapes are
a little bit more complicated. So let's
construct a test react fully from
scratch starting at one dimension. So
there's only a few shapes that are
actually possible in one dimension.
Those being a line, array, a line
segment. But for now, we'll need to
worry about the line segment. So like a
square and a cube, a tesseract or a
hyper cube is also composed of equal
length line segments. So we only need to
worry about the line segment here in
one-dimensional space. So if we want to
make a square from this line segment,
what we can do is take this line segment
in the one-dimensional space and
basically stretch it along a new
dimension. And if we stretch it the
right distance, then we get a square. So
now if we want to make a cube from this
square, all we have to do is repeat the
same process. We just take that square
and we just stretch it out along a new
dimension and we get a cube. So
naturally to make a test rack, we do
exactly the same thing. We take this
cube and we stretch it along a new
dimension. Obviously this is where
things get a little bit tricky because
as threedimensional beings we don't have
another dimension to use here. So what
we have to do is we have to compensate
and basically pretend that a direction
and threedimensional space is actually a
new direction. So to do that we add a
dimension that has the directions inner
and outer. But it's very very important
to note here that this is not where the
direction would be. You would have to
literally, like I said, add another side
to reality to do this. And as
three-dimensional beings, we just can't
do it. Our brains just have only ever
experienced three-dimensional space. But
anyway, using this compromise, we can
take the cube and we can stretch it
along either one of these dimensions.
And as you can see, we just made a
tessact. So, that's basically how
four-dimensional space and
four-dimensional objects are
constructed. It's actually pretty
simple. It's just a weird concept to
grasp because you literally can't
visualize that fourth dimension. But
don't worry, in this video, I'm going to
give you a lot of different ways to kind
of understand what that fourth dimension
would look like, or not what it would
look like, but how it behaves. Now, one
thing to note here is if we were
four-dimensional beings living in a
four-dimensional universe, it would make
perfect sense to us. In the same way
that we have depth cues to tell how far
away something is, there would be cues
to give us information about that fourth
dimension of space. But again, we just
have never experienced those and they
don't exist in our universe. So, we just
aren't able to visualize them,
unfortunately. So, a really useful way
to understand this is with this game
called 4D Toys on Steam. And this is a
game that basically just renders 4D
objects. Interestingly, computers have
no problem computing 4D space and 4D
objects. In 3D simulations, a computer
just calculates an object's position
with, of course, those three numbers
that we mentioned earlier, X, Y, and Z.
And all we need to do to calculate the
position of a 4D object is to just add
one more number. So, even though
computers can calculate these objects in
their positions, they still can't fully
render them. And the reason for this is
because computers output 2D images. So,
they technically can't even display 3D
objects in their true form. Computers
basically just visualize a shadow of a
3D shape casted onto a 2D surface. The
only reason we can understand these 2D
projections as 3D objects is because we
understand the concept of depth cues,
which basically tell us how far away or
how close something is to us based on
the size of the object. And using this,
we can also kind of gauge how far away
objects might be from us. Now, if you
lived in a four-dimensional universe,
that universe would have similar depth
cues to be able to give you information
about an object's position along that
fourth dimension. But since we're
three-dimensional beings and we live in
a three-dimensional universe, not only
can we not understand or comprehend
these cues, but they literally don't
exist in our universe. And that's the
reason why computers can't simulate
them. It's sort of the same concept as
trying to imagine a new color. There are
other colors that exist, but in order to
be able to see them, you would need to
have eyes that could detect the light,
and then you would need to have a brain
that could actually process that
information. So because we can't make an
accurate shadow of a 4D object in 3D
space, we instead have to once again
compromise. And so what we do is we
instead take a three-dimensional
cross-section of that four-dimensional
object and that we are able to simulate.
The only problem with this is it looks
very very confusing. Now if you were a
fourthdimensional being and you had a
computer that could render 3D space,
that space would not look like these
cross-sections of three-dimensional
objects. Instead, like how our computers
simulate a two-dimensional shadow of a
three-dimensional object, their
computers would simulate a
three-dimensional shadow of a
four-dimensional object. And this is
because a fourthdimensional being could
actually see all three sides of a
three-dimensional object in the same way
that we can see the entirety of a
two-dimensional object, but a
two-dimensional being wouldn't be able
to see the entirety of that. So, this
right here is a representation of a
two-dimensional universe. And this
little stick guy right here is a
two-dimensional being. Now, to him, this
object that we can clearly see is a
circle would just look like a line
because he can only see this one
dimension of it. But because we're
three-dimensional beings, we can see
that this is actually not a
onedimensional line, but a
two-dimensional circle. So, it would be
a similar concept for a four-dimensional
being. So, this stick figure is stuck in
a two-dimensional universe, but this
two-dimensional universe is actually
contained inside of a three-dimensional
universe. And as we can see here in this
three-dimensional universe, there is a
sphere. Now, because the sphere isn't
interacting with that two-dimensional
universe to the stick figure, there is
no sphere. However, if we take this
two-dimensional universe and we move it
so that it interacts with the sphere, we
can seemingly out of nowhere, a circle
has just appeared. And as we take that
circle and move it closer to the middle
of this sphere, you can see to the stick
figure, the sphere gets bigger as it
reaches the middle. And then it gets
smaller as the two-dimensional universe
passes through the sphere until it
eventually pops out of existence. Now,
of course, to us, we can see that this
makes perfect sense. The shape isn't
actually changing and morphing. It's
just that the cross-section of the
sphere that the stick figure can see is
being passed through the sphere. So,
let's take this concept and move it up a
dimension. So, here we're in a
three-dimensional universe. So, now what
we're going to do is take a 4D
hypersphere and pass it through this
three-dimensional universe. And as we
can see, when we do that, we see a
sphere that pops into existence, gets
bigger as it gets closer to the middle
of the hypersphere, smaller as it gets
closer to the end, and then pops out of
existence again. So, going back to our
2D universe contained inside the 3D
universe, we can see here that we have a
rotating cube. So, now if we take the 2D
universe and move it through this
rotating cube, we can see to the stick
figure, it looks like this cube appears
to morph and transform and just do all
sorts of weird things. is it like gains
more sides and then loses them. All of
the angles are changing, but the shape
isn't actually changing shape. We can
very clearly see here that just the
cross-section of the shape is being
rapidly changed as the object is being
rotated. So, going back to 3D space, in
this 3D space, even though you can't see
it, there is a rotating 4D tesseract.
And as we move the 3D universe through
that test ract, we can see that it once
again appears to change shape and gain
sides and do all of that weird stuff,
but now in three dimensions. So the
shape-shifting of this object is not
caused by the object actually changing
in any form. It's just simply caused by
the object moving and rotating through
the three spatial dimensions we're used
to and the fourth dimension as well. So
using this principle of taking a 3D
cross-section of a 4D object, we can
actually make 4D games. and people have
done it. There's many, many 4D games out
there and even games that go in much
higher dimensions. And one game that I
think does a pretty good job of making
this a little bit more intuitive is 4D
mining. So, obviously, you can already
tell at first glance, this game looks
really, really weird and confusing, but
it actually has a built-in way of kind
of understanding the game. So, as you
can see here, we have little frog. His
name is Frank, and he is a
two-dimensional being. So Frank is bound
to two dimensions and he can only move
forward, backward, up, and down. But as
we can see, his world is much more
complex because it has that third
dimension which allows for objects to be
in front and behind. So Frank can't
fully experience this full 3D world. But
what we can do is make a little bit of a
compromise. And by using the scroll
wheel, we can actually rotate the
cross-section of the 3D world that he
experiences. And in doing that, we can
get Frank anywhere we want on this
three-dimensional world, but he's still
only experiencing and bound to two
dimensions. So, for example, if we want
to put Frank in this cave here, we can
just rotate the cross-section so that it
lines up with the cave, and then Frank
can just go jump in. And he's a little
bit stuck now. So, if we want to get him
out, we can just rotate it a little bit
more. And now he has a way out. So, at
first glance, you can see this looks
pretty much just like normal Minecraft,
besides some of the weirdly shaped
blocks and the floating trees. But by
using my scroll wheel to rotate the 3D
cross-section of the 4D world we're
experiencing, we can see that there's
actually a lot more to this world than
meets the eye. As you can see, the
biomes change and mountains appear and
disappear. It looks very confusing, but
the point here is that this is a
threedimensional cross-section of that
four-dimensional world. Now, that last
part might have been like really
confusing, and if you're confused by
that, don't worry. It's super confusing,
and it's not important you understand
exactly how this works right now. You
just need a general concept of how this
kind of functions.
Okay, so now that that's all out of the
way, how is this relevant to your
everyday life? Well, in our universe, if
you want to describe where an object's
position is, you not only need its three
spatial dimensions, but there's one more
dimension that you need, when it occurs.
So technically, our universe is
comprised of four dimensions. Three
spatial dimensions and one dimension of
time. Now, it is widely accepted to
consider time as the fourth dimension
because it does fit the definition of
being a dimension. That being it's a
measurable extent of some kind. But it's
important to note that it is
fundamentally different from the three
spatial dimensions of our universe.
Because we can only experience time in
one direction. But as 3D beings, it
isn't possible for us to fully
comprehend the dimension of time. It
would be like experiencing two events at
exactly the same time. It's not even
something that we can comprehend. And
interestingly, two of our most
successful theories of the universe, the
standard model, which is an equation
that basically aims to define and
describe all fundamental particles in
the universe, and the theory of
relativity, which deals with spacetime,
are fundamentally incompatible. We don't
really understand how particles and
quantum fluctuations and space and time
all merge together. Right now, this is
the holy grail of physics is finding a
way to unify these theories. So, general
relativity and special relativity are
two of Einstein's most famous models.
General relativity attempts to explain
gravity and motion, which it does very
accurately. And special relativity aims
to describe energy, space, and time,
which is also highly accurate in what it
attempts to describe. These theories
together form the full theory of
relativity, which very much points to
spacetime being sort of like a 4D object
that exists all at once. These two
theories together make up the theory of
relativity which very much points
towards space and time being a unified
4D object. So according to our best
theories, the universe is composed in a
way that is at least one dimension
higher than we typically think. In order
to fully see that extra dimension, that
being time, you would either need to be
a theoretical 4D being that could see
all of time at once, or you would need
to be a 3D being that experienced all of
time from beginning to end. In the same
way that Frank would have to experience
every 2D cross-section of his 3D world
in order to fully understand it, but he
still could never truly see the full 3D
world. In the same way that we can only
see a cross-section of the
fourdimensional object of spaceime that
we are experiencing. So the last piece
of the puzzle here is described by the
theory of relativity. Time is relative,
which basically means the faster you go,
the slower you experience time. But in
the universe, the speed at which you can
go seems to be catapp. It's the speed of
light. At least as we understand it,
nothing can go faster than the speed of
light. And the reason for this is
because light is made up of photons,
which are massless particles. And that's
why they can travel at an uncapped
speed. So how do photons experience
time? Well, they don't. At those speeds,
the effects of time dilation become
infinite. And so to a photon from the
moment the beginning of the universe
happened to now that photon has
experienced no time. So this means or at
least appears to mean that our
experience of time is an experience
created by our minds. Time does exist
but our experience of it isn't a fully
encompassing view of it. Just because we
observe it this way it doesn't
necessarily mean that it objectively
exists in this way. So this concept is a
frontier of modern science and there's
many ways to explain it but one of the
ideas is the block universe theory which
basically describes all of time and all
of our three dimensions as one
continuous 4D object. Going back to that
proton that doesn't experience time. It
actually does experience time all at
once. And so because of this, modern
physics basically suggests that all
moments in time are equally real and
exist in a higher fourth dimension.
Basically, our universe, all of space,
and all of time would exist as one full
object. And the present moment is a
cross-section of that entire object. So
the present moment that you're
experiencing right now is, at least
according to modern theories, a 3D
cross-section of an entire 4D shape.
Whenever you hear the term spacetime,
that is what it's referring to. One
continuous fabric of three spatial
dimensions and one dimension of time. Or
at least that's what the best and most
accurate mathematical theories we have
today describe. This is why people make
such a big fuss about Albert Einstein.
He proposed this idea and then proved
with mathematics that it was a very
accurate way of describing our universe.
And to this day, it's still the best
description that we have.
So, what does all of this mean? Well,
what it means is that every single
decision you've ever made, everything
you've ever been, everything that you
are, and everything that you ever will
be exists all at the same time on a
higher dimension and that your life is
being constructed in a higher
dimensional way that we don't fully
understand. Have you ever felt like
something in your life happened for a
reason? Or maybe ever heard that one day
you'll look back and realize that you
were exactly where you needed to be,
doing exactly what you needed to do,
even if it didn't feel like it. Well,
this could be why. Spacetime just isn't
as simple as one thing happens, then the
next, and then the next. Our lives are
constructed in ways that we can't fully
understand as human beings. So that
could mean that your life and our world
is so much more intricate and beautiful
and complex than we can even comprehend
with our brains. And modernday physics
says it's not only possible but
probable. So take this information with
a grain of salt. I want you to come to
your own conclusions about the universe.
But just keep this in the back of your
mind and really consider one thing. Is
the universe giving you what you need?
Now, you might immediately say, "No, of
course not. I mean, if it did, I would
be living on a beach in a mansion
somewhere doing my hobbies all day." And
you know, that's fair. But is that
really what you need? Or is that just
what you want? Because to a human being,
those things sound really good. To the
universe, there's no good and there's no
bad. There just are things that are
things that exist. Because of this, I
mean, even horrible things can happen
for a reason. even if it's for a reason
that we as human beings will never be
able to understand. So try to listen to
what it might be telling you. I mean I
know personally that in my life I mean
things guide you. When you make a
mistake you have consequences and that
pushes you in the other direction. When
you do things good it feels good and you
want to stay there and that keeps you
there. It's like this restoring an
equilibrium force. And you know
interestingly just through modern
physics we've come to a place of
spirituality. I mean the universe
showing and teaching you things is very
much a concept of religion. And I'm not
a religious person but I do believe that
the universe it does show you things and
it does show you sort of the correct
way. not technically the correct way
because again to the universe there is
no correct, there's no wrong, there's no
good, there's no bad, but there is
certain paths that for us and the
universe that we live in with the
specific laws that it has. There are
certain ideas and decisions and things
that we can do that make it a lot easier
to live peacefully and harmoniously with
our surroundings, with other people. So
being a human being, always keep your
mind open to new ideas. Always be ready
to take in new information, even if it's
a challenge to do so. And doing this not
only makes your life better, but it
makes the lives of the people around you
better, too. So, anyway, just keep this
in mind. And if these concepts are
really big or scary or kind of hard to
understand, it's okay. It won't be like
that forever. Peace and love, and thank
you for your time.
[Music]